About The Authors
==================

**Larry Peterson** is the Robert E. Kahn Professor of Computer
Science, Emeritus at Princeton University, where he served as Chair
from 2003-2009. He is a co-author of the best selling networking
textbook *Computer Networks: A Systems Approach (6e)*, which is now
available as open source on GitHub. His research focuses on the
design, implementation, and operation of Internet-scale distributed
systems, including the widely used PlanetLab and MeasurementLab
platforms.  He is currently leading the CORD and Aether access-edge
cloud projects at the Open Networking Foundation (ONF), where he
serves CTO.  Professor Peterson is a member of the National Academy of
Engineering, a Fellow of the ACM and the IEEE, the 2010 recipient of
the IEEE Kobayashi Computer and Communication Award, and the 2013
recipient of the ACM SIGCOMM Award. He received his Ph.D. degree from
Purdue University in 1985.

**Oguz Sunay** is currently the Vice President for Research &
Development at ONF, where he leads all mobile-related projects. Prior
to that, he served as the Chief Architect for Mobile Networking at
ONF. Before joining ONF, Sunay was the CTO at Argela-USA, where he was
the innovator of a Programmable Radio Access Network Architecture
(ProgRAN) for 5G that enabled the world’s first dynamically
programmable RAN slicing solution. He has also held prior industry
positions at Nokia Research Center and Bell Laboratories, where he
focused on 3G and 4G end-to-end systems architectures and participated
and chaired various standardization activities. Sunay has also spent
over 10 years in academia, as a Professor of Electrical and Computer
Engineering. He holds many U.S. and European patents on various
aspects of 3G, 4G, and 5G, and has authored numerous journal and
conference publications. He received his Ph.D. and M.Sc. from Queen’s
University, Canada, and his B.Sc.Hon. from METU, Turkey.
